Guidelines
Position of the French Working Group on Perioperative Haemostasis
(GIHP) on viscoelastic tests: What role for which indication in bleeding
situations?
Ste´phanie Roullet a,*, Emmanuel de Maistre b, Brigitte Ickx c, Normand Blais d,
Sophie Susen e, David Faraoni f, Delphine Garrigue g, Fanny Bonhomme h, Anne Godier i,
Dominique Lasne j, and GIHP
a Inserm U 12-11, service anesthe´sie-re´animation 1, universite´ de Bordeaux, CHU de Bordeaux, 33000 Bordeaux, France
b Unite´ d’he´mostase, centre hospitalier universitaire, 21079 Dijon, France
c Universite´ Libre de Bruxelles, Erasme University Hospital, Department of Anesthesiology, Brussels, Belgium
d He´matologie et oncologie me´dicale, CHUM, Montre´al, Canada
e Institut d’he´matologie et transfusion, CHRU de Lille, 59037 Lille, France
f Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
g Poˆle d’anesthe´sie-re´animation, CHRU de Lille, 59037 Lille, France
h Service d’anesthe´siologie, hoˆpital universitaire de Gene`ve, Geneva, Switzerland
i Service d’anesthe´sie-re´animation, Fondation Rothschild, 75019 Paris, France
j Laboratoire d’he´matologie, hoˆpital Necker, 75015 Paris, France
Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 38 (2019) 539–548
A R T I C L E 
I N F O
Article history:
Available online
3 February 2018
Keywords:
Viscoelastic tests
Thromboelastography
Thromboelastometry
Severe trauma
Cardiac surgery
Liver transplantation
A B S T R A C T
Purpose: Viscoelastic tests (VETs), thromboelastography (TEG1) and thromboelastometry (ROTEM1) are
global tests of coagulation performed on whole blood. They evaluate the mechanical strength of a clot as
it builds and develops after coagulation itself. The time required to obtain haemostasis results remains a
major problem for clinicians dealing with bleeding, although some teams have developed a rapid
laboratory response strategy. Indeed, the value of rapid point-of-care diagnostic devices such as VETs has
increased over the years. However, VETs are not standardised and there are few recommendations from
the learned societies regarding their use. In 2014, the recommendations of the International Society of
Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH) only concerned haemophilia. The French Working Group on
Perioperative haemostasis (GIHP) therefore proposes to summarise knowledge on the clinical use of
these techniques in the setting of emergency and perioperative medicine.
Methods: A review of the literature.
Principal ﬁndings: The role of the VETs seems established in the management of severe trauma and in
cardiac surgery, both adult and paediatric. In other situations, their role remains to be deﬁned: hepatic
transplantation, postpartum haemorrhage, and non-cardiac surgery. They must be part of the global
management of haemostasis based on algorithms deﬁned in each centre and for each population of
patients. Their position at the bedside or in the laboratory is a matter of discussion between clinicians
and biologists.
Conclusion: VETs must be included in algorithms. In consultation with the biology laboratory, these
devices should be situated according to the way each centre functions.

C 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS on behalf of Socie´te´ franc¸aise d’anesthe´sie et de
re´animation (Sfar). This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
* Corresponding author. Inserm U 12-11, laboratoire maladies rares : ge´ne´tique et me´tabolisme (MRGM), service d’anesthe´sie-re´animation uro-vasculaire et
transplantation re´nale, service d’anesthe´sie-re´animation I, hoˆpital Pellegrin, universite´ de Bordeaux, centre hospitalier universitaire de Bordeaux, place Ame´lie-Raba-Le´on,
33076 Bordeaux cedex, France.
E-mail address: stephanie.roullet@chu-bordeaux.fr (S. Roullet).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accpm.2017.12.014
2352-5568/
C 2018 Socie´te´ franc¸aise d’anesthe´sie et de re´animation (Sfar). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Members of the interest group on Perioperative Haemostasis
(GIHP)
P. Albaladejo (Anaesthesia-resuscitation, Grenoble, France), S.
Belisle (Anaesthesia, Montreal, Canada), N. Blais (Haematology-
Haemostasis, Montreal, Canada), F. Bonhomme (Anaesthesia-
resuscitation, Geneva, Switzerland), A. Borel-Derlon (Haemato-
logy-haemostasis, Caen, France), J.Y. Borg (Haemostasis, Rouen,
France), J.-L. Bosson (Vascular Medicine, Grenoble, France), A.
Cohen (Cardiology, Paris, France), D. Faraoni (Anaesthesia-resusci-
tation, 
Toronto, 
Canada), 
P. 
Fontana 
(Haemostasis, 
Geneva,
Switzerland), D. Garrigue-Huet (Anaesthesia-resuscitation, Lille,
France), A. Godier (Anaesthesia-resuscitation, Paris, France), Y.
Gruel (Haemostasis, Tours, France), J. Guay (Anaesthesia, Montre´al,
Canada), J.F. Hardy (Anaesthesia, Montre´al, Canada), Y. Huet
(Cardiology, Paris), B. Ickx (Anaesthesia- resuscitation, Brussels,
Belgium) S. Laporte (Pharmacology, Saint-Etienne), D. Lasne
(Haematology, Paris), J.H. Levy (Anaesthesia-resuscitation, Dur-
ham, USA), J. Llau (Anaesthesia, Valencia, Spain), G. Le Gal (Vascular
Medicine, Ottawa, Canada) T. Lecompte (Haematology, Geneva,
Switzerland), S. Lessire (Anaesthesia, Namur, Belgium), D. Longrois
(Anaesthesia-resuscitation, Paris, France), S. Madi-Jebara (Anaes-
thesia, Beirut, Lebanon), E. Marret (Anaesthesia-resuscitation,
Paris, France), J.L. Mas (Neurology, Paris, France), M. Mazighi
(Neurology, Paris, France), P. Mismetti (Clinical Pharmacology,
Saint-Etienne, France), PE Morange (Haematology, Marseille,
France), S. Motte (Vascular Pathology, Brussels, Belgium), F.
Mullier (Haematology, Namur, Belgium), N. Nathan (Anaesthe-
sia-resuscitation, Limoges, France), P. Nguyen (He´matology, Reims,
France), Y. Ozier (Anaesthesia-resuscitation, Brest, France), G.
Pernod (Vascular Medicine, Grenoble, France), N. Nathan (Anaes-
thesia-resuscitation, Limoges, France) N. Rosencher (Anaesthesia-
resuscitation, Paris, France), S. Roullet (Anaesthesia-resuscitation,
Bordeaux, France), P.M. Roy (Emergency Medicine, Angers, France),
C.M. Samama (Anaesthesia-resuscitation, Paris, France), S. Schlum-
berger (Anaesthesia-resuscitation, Suresnes, France), J.F. Schved
(Haematology, Montpellier, France) S. Van Belle (Cardiology, Lille,
France), P. Van der Linden (Anaesthesia-resuscitation, Brussels,
Belgium), A. Vincentelli (Cardiac surgery, Lille, France), and P.
Zufferey (Anaesthesia-resuscitation, Saint-Etienne, France).
2. Introduction
Viscoelastic tests (VETs), thromboelastography (TEG1) and
thromboelastometry (ROTEM1) are global tests of coagulation
performed on whole blood, unlike the standard tests such as Quick
Time (QT), activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (aPTT) and the
ﬁbrinogen test performed on platelet poor plasma (PPP) [1]. They
evaluate the mechanical strength of a clot as it builds and develops
after coagulation itself. The time required to obtain haemostasis
results remains a major problem for clinicians dealing with
bleeding, although some teams have developed a rapid laboratory
response strategy [2]. Indeed, the value of rapid point-of-care
diagnostic devices such as TEG1 and ROTEM1 has increased over
the years.
However, VETs are not standardised and there are few
recommendations from the learned societies regarding their use.
In 2014, the recommendations of the International Society of
Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH) only concerned haemophilia
[3]. The French Working Group on Perioperative Haemostasis
(GIHP) therefore proposes to synthesise knowledge on the clinical
use of these techniques in the setting of emergency and
perioperative medicine. The literature search: After a reminder
of how VETs work, we attempt to answer various questions
according to the clinical situation: can they be used to identify
abnormal haemostasis? To monitor ﬁbrinolysis? To guide the
treatment of coagulopathy? To improve the prognosis of patients?
Are their results obtained more rapidly than those of routine
laboratory tests? Where should they be placed: at the bedside or in
the laboratory?
3. Principles of viscoelastic tests and analytical performances
3.1. Main principles
VETsanalysetheelasticandviscouspropertiesofwholebloodtaken
from citrated tubes during the various phases of coagulation, which are
also inﬂuenced by the ﬁbrinolytic system. Unlike conventional
coagulation tests that study clotting factors in PPP with the addition
of procoagulant phospholipids, VET investigate the coagulation
potential of whole blood by incorporating certain properties of
platelets, leukocytes and erythrocytes. Their main characteristic is
their sensitivity to the mechanical properties of the clot.
A VET is composed of a bowl containing the whole blood to be
analysed. In TEG1, the bowl oscillates 4.758 around a plunger
connected to a torsion wire. It is important for the robustness of the
device and to avoid artefacts that rotational thromboelastometry
(ROTEM1) does not use a torsion wire anymore and stabilises the
pin axis with a ball bearing. While uncoagulated blood remains ﬂuid
and does not transmit any displacement to the plunger and thus to
the torsion wire, coagulated blood causes a circular movement of
the wire whose amplitude is recorded on a plot. A typical
thromboelastography pattern is composed of four important
parameters (Fig. 1). The ﬁrst component (R, reaction time in
minutes in TEG1 or CT, clotting time in seconds in ROTEM1)
represents the initial phase of coagulation activation before a change
in the physical properties of the blood occurs, i.e. a clot. The second
component (K, kinetic time in minutes in TEG1 or CFT, clot
formation time in seconds in ROTEM1) estimates the clotting time
required for an amplitude of 20 mm to be obtained. The angle alpha
is derived from the tangent of the curve and represents the kinetics
of clot formation. Finally, the maximum amplitude (MA in mm in
TEG1 or the maximum clot ﬁrmness, MCF in mm in ROTEM1)
expresses the maximum deﬂection point of the curve and represents
the maximum clot strength. The amplitude of the clot strength at
5 and 10 min is termed A5 and A10 in ROTEM1. Other parameters of
interest are maximum lysis (ML), which is the maximum lysis of the
clot in percentage of MCF during run time. In ROTEM1, lysis index
(LI) at 30 and 60 min are deﬁned as the residual clot in percentage of
MCF 30 and 60 minutes after the clotting time. In TEG1 lysis (LY)
30 and 60 are deﬁned as the reduction in clot ﬁrmness in percentage
of MA 30 and 60 minutes after MA [4].
Initially, this technology was used mainly by physiologists,
owing to its complexity and poor reproducibility. Technological
advances have led to the development of automated models
distributed in France by Haemonetics and Werfen: the TEG1 and
the ROTEM1, which are adaptations of the original thromboe-
lastography. The analytical performance and ease of use of these
devices must therefore be evaluated separately.
VETs are performed on whole blood taken from citrated tubes.
Thus, blood must be recalciﬁed. This step has always been done
automatically on ROTEM1 but was manual on the TEG1 (pipetting
of 20 ml of concentrated calcium). On the new version of the TEG1,
this step in now automatic. This calcium addition is supra
physiologic, as for standard laboratory tests.
3.2. Thromboelastography (TEG1)
The analysis is carried out while a bowl containing the whole
blood oscillates 4.758 every 5 seconds. A suspended metal rod
connects the cuvette to a transducer detecting the movement of
S. Roullet et al. / Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 38 (2019) 539–548
540
the rod, which starts to oscillate as soon as the viscoelastic force of
the clot increases. The device is distributed with reagents allowing
various analyses to be performed:
 kaolin TEG with and without heparinase uses the activation
properties of the contact phase of kaolin, leading to activation of
the intrinsic coagulation pathway. The combination of hepari-
nase (2 IU) allows the presence of heparin to be evaluated in a
sample and makes it possible to study the intrinsic route of
coagulation in a patient receiving heparin. The tests are
interpretable up to heparinaemia of 6 IU/mL;
 rapid TEG (r-TEG) evaluates coagulation after activation by
addition of tissue factor and kaolin. The association of kaolin and
tissue factor is a strong booster of coagulation and allows
obtaining the maximal amplitude of the clot faster than with
TEG kaolin. This test also provides another information: the
activated clotting time (ACT), which is the time in seconds from
the beginning of the test to the beginning of ﬁbrin formation;
 functional ﬁbrinogen TEG (TEG FF) makes it possible to identify
the role of ﬁbrinogen in clot strength, irrespective of the activity
of the platelets. It is obtained by activation of the extrinsic
pathway of coagulation associated with abciximab, an inhibitor
of ﬁbrinogen-platelet binding.
TEG FF and r-TEG are heparin sensitive.
In its earlier versions, the TEG1 had a critical pipetting step
whereby a volume of whole blood was deposited in the container
with the reagent. The new version (6s), which is more automated,
uses a system of cartridges, with minimal handling and reading of
clot formation not anymore by a viscoelastic but by a resonance
method. The blood sample is exposed to a ﬁxed frequency
vibration. A LED detector measures the vertical movements of
the blood clot. The strongest clots have the highest resonance
frequencies, resulting in a more classical pattern of greater
amplitude [5].
3.3. Thromboelastometry (ROTEM1)
The ROTEM1 bowl remains static. The pin immersed in the
bowl containing the citrated whole blood performs an oscillation
movement of 4.758 every 6 seconds. The viscoelastic force of the
clot interferes with the circular movement of the axis, which is
detected by an optical reader that captures its movement. The
optical drive data is transformed into a graph. ROTEM1 is also sold
with reagents evaluating parameters similar to those available
with TEG1.
 NATEM assesses coagulation globally. This is the recalciﬁcation
of blood taken from a citrated tube without any other reagent;
 NAHEPTEM, a NATEM with heparinase;
 INTEM evaluates the intrinsic pathway of coagulation, with
ellagic acid as activator of the contact phase;
 HEPTEM inhibits up to 7 IU/mL of heparin on INTEM;
 EXTEM uses a recombinant tissue factor (Instrumentation
Laboratories, Bedford, MA) to assess the extrinsic coagulation
pathway;
 FIBTEM identiﬁes the role of ﬁbrinogen in clot formation and its
mechanical properties. Cytochalasin D, an inhibitor of the
cytoskeleton actin-myosin, is used in this test to inhibit the
platelet function involved in clot retraction. A variant, ‘‘FIBTEM
plus’’ uses cytochalasin D and tiroﬁban, which inhibits the
binding of ﬁbrinogen to the platelet GPIIb-IIIa complex;
 APTEM discriminates between ﬁbrinolysis and platelet-mediat-
ed clot retraction by comparison to EXTEM by addition of
aprotinin or tranexamic acid (t-APTEM), which are plasmin
inhibitors.
It is to note that EXTEM, FIBTEM and APTEM contain a heparin
inhibitor, which neutralises up to 5 IU/mL of heparin.
3.4. Comparison between the two techniques and routine coagulation
tests
In a study of 52 patients with extracorporeal circulation (ECC),
Ortmann et al. compared TEG1 and ROTEM1 [6]. The study
demonstrated a systematic difference between the values of MA
TEG FF and MCF FIBTEM attributed to the various platelet function
inhibitors used by these two techniques or to differences in the
activators used (tissue factor, phospholipids) [7,8]. The two
techniques gave different results and were shown not to be
interchangeable [9]. It should be noted that VETs are usually
performed at 37 8C and should be interpreted with caution in
hypothermic patients. In ROTEM1 delta, measurement tempera-
ture can be adapted to patient temperature within the range of
30 to 40 8C.
It is difﬁcult to compare the values obtained with VETs and
those obtained by the routine coagulation tests. While several
authors have correlated VET parameters with the numerical values
of platelets and ﬁbrinogen [10–16], few have observed a signiﬁcant
correlation with QT and aPTT. This is due to several factors related
to the VET analysis of whole blood such as the inﬂuence of red
blood cells, leukocytes and platelets on haemostasis. The correla-
tion between VETs parameters and QT/INR depends on the
Fig. 1. Normal plot obtained with a viscoelastic device and its parameters. TEG1: R: reaction time; K: kinetic time; a: clot formation kinetic; MA: maximal amplitude.
ROTEM1: CT: clotting time; CFT: clot formation time; a: clot formation kinetic; A5: clot amplitude at 5 min; A10: clot amplitude at 10 min; MCF: maximum clot ﬁrmness.
S. Roullet et al. / Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 38 (2019) 539–548 
541
activator used and the clinical setting. Whereas EXTEM CT
correlates well with INR in patients treated with vitamin K
antagonists [17,18], INTEM CT, kaolin TEG R and r-TEG R do not
[17,19]. Agren et al. evaluated the approximate value of ﬁbrinogen
obtained by TEG FF in 63 surgical patients and 38 healthy
volunteers [20]. Fibrinogen concentrations obtained by TEG FF
were on average 1.0 g/L higher than those obtained by the Clauss
test.
The correlation between ﬁbrinogen concentration and VET
parameters is inﬂuenced by various parameters: heparinaemia [6],
type of vascular ﬁlling solutes [21], haematocrit [10], factor XIII
concentration [22], administration of ﬁbrinogen concentrates [23].
3.5. Technical variability
Lang et al. observed a coefﬁcient of variation (CV) ranging from
2 to 14% for ROTEM1 parameters [24]. The quality assurance study
by Kitchen et al. carried out in 2010 in 18 centres for TEG1 and
10 centres for ROTEM1 found CVs ranging from 7 to 83% [25]. VETs
lack reagents that meet the standards of international standardi-
zation and allow evaluation with the development of quality
control exchange programs. The factors involved in the variability
of the results are the following: type of device; reagents; pre-
analytical parameters such as type of sampling, time elapsed
before start of analysis, site of analysis and clinical context. The
thresholds found in monocentric studies have rarely undergone
independent prospective evaluation, limiting the generalization of
their results.
TEG1 and ROTEM1 are global coagulation tests that evaluate
clot formation and its mechanical properties and, to a certain
extent, its stability (inﬂuence of the ﬁbrinolytic system) in whole
blood. The different reagents available make it possible to study
various aspects of haemostasis. Nevertheless, the values of the
parameters are not perfectly correlated with the routine coagula-
tion tests and TEG1 and ROTEM1 are not interchangeable. An
algorithm built from TEG1 cannot be used with ROTEM1 and vice-
versa.
4. Severe trauma
Haemorrhage is the leading cause of mortality in patients
hospitalised for trauma. It is complicated in 25 to 30% of cases by
acute traumatic coagulopathy (ATC), which worsens the bleeding
and increases mortality four-fold. Several clinical studies have
shown that VETs can predict recourse to transfusion of red blood
cell concentrates (RBCs), mass transfusion and mortality [26]. FIB-
TEM MCF < 7 mm is predictive of RBC transfusion [27]. In
300 trauma patients, EXTEM A5 > 35 mm had a negative predic-
tive 
value 
of 
83% 
for 
RBC 
transfusion 
[28]. 
r-TEG
ACT < 105 seconds was a risk factor independent of the absence
of transfusion within the ﬁrst 6 hours after admission (OR: 1.85,
95% CI: 1.07–3.18) [29]. The prospective analysis of 300 trauma
patients showed that the 35 mm threshold for EXTEM A5 made it
possible to predict massive transfusion (AUC: 0.80, 95% CI: 0.63–
0.97). An analysis of 808 trauma patients found a predictive value
of massive transfusion for FIBTEM A5  9 mm and EXTEM
A5  40 mm with a sensitivity of 77.5% and 72.2% respectively
[30]. r-TEG ACT > 128 seconds was an independent risk factor for
massive transfusion in the ﬁrst 6 hours (OR: 5.15; 95% CI: 1.36–
19.49) [29]. In a severe trauma study in 1974 patients, Holcomb
et al. found a better prediction of massive transfusion by the r-TEG
angle than by the routine tests (P < 0.001) [31]. In a retrospective
study in 190 patients, r-TEG MA  55 mm was predictive of
massive transfusion [32]. In terms of predicting mortality, tests
and thresholds differ between studies. EXTEM and FIBTEM have
received the most attention [26].
To date, published data do not allow recommending neither a
repetition nor a minimal frequency of VETs analysis.
In the setting of severe trauma, results are available more
quickly with VETs than with laboratory tests. The GIHP proposes
that VETs can be used for the early diagnosis of coagulopathy. They
predict the need for transfusion in CGR or the use of massive
transfusion. The GIHP proposes that they should be used to
indicate haemostatic treatment and to make clinical staff more
aware of the severity of trauma.
VETs allow the rapid detection of hypoﬁbrinogenemia. FIBTEM
A10 at 5 mm has a good sensitivity (91%) and speciﬁcity (85%) to
detect a ﬁbrinogen concentration of less than 1 g/L [33]. The
sensitivity and speciﬁcity of EXTEM A5 < 36 mm to predict
ﬁbrinogen concentrations of less than 1.5 g/L are 53% and 87%,
respectively. FIBTEM A5 < 9.5 mm had a sensitivity of 78% and a
speciﬁcity of 70% [34]. The correlation between MA values of TEG
FF and MCF of FIBTEM is good (r = 0.71, P < 0.001) and their
correlations with ﬁbrinogen concentration by the Clauss method
are identical (r = 0.64, P < 0.001) [35].
The main tests used to diagnose ATC are EXTEM and FIBTEM.
Although the literature is consensual about thresholds between
35 and 40 mm for EXTEM A5, between 8 and 10 mm for FIBTEM A5
and between 7 to 10 mm for FIBTEM MCF to predict coagulopathy,
massive transfusion and/or an increase in mortality, it is still too
early to recommend thresholds.
Hyper ﬁbrinolysis may contribute to ATC and worsen the
prognosis and its diagnosis is difﬁcult. With ROTEM1, the lysis
index at 60 min EXTEM LI60 < 85% suggests hyper ﬁbrinolysis in
6.9% of severe trauma cases [27]. The threshold of 90% led to an
incidence of 5.7% in a series of 88 trauma patients [33]. Maximum
lysis (ML) in EXTEM > 15% led to the diagnosis of 5% hyper
ﬁbrinolysis in a series of 288 trauma patients [36]. With r-TEG, a
lysis threshold of 15% led to the diagnosis of hyper ﬁbrinolysis in
18% of 61 trauma patients requiring transfusion and in 34% of those
requiring a massive transfusion [37]. Levrat et al. deﬁned hyper
ﬁbrinolysis as a globulin lysis time of less than 90 minutes. They
showed in a series of 23 severe trauma patients that the MCF of
EXTEM  18 mm, a lysis index at 30 min (LI30) < 71% and an
increase of more than 7% in APTEM MCF were associated with
hyper ﬁbrinolysis with a sensitivity of 100%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, and a speciﬁcity of 100% [38].
ROTEM1 data were also compared with markers of hyper
ﬁbrinolysis in a series of 288 consecutive trauma patients not
receiving tranexamic acid and whose blood was sampled on
admission [36]. Hyper ﬁbrinolysis based on maximal lysis
(ML) > 15% was present in only 5% of patients, while 57% showed
signs of ﬁbrinolysis activation with higher levels of plasmin-
antiplasmin (PAP) complexes at twice the normal level. ROTEM1
detected lysis only when PAPs were increased to 30-fold the
normal value and antiplasmin was less than 75% of normal. The
authors concluded that ROTEM1 did not detect the activation of
ﬁbrinolysis. In a cohort of 73 trauma patients requiring massive
transfusion, LY30  3% was associated with a higher risk of
massive transfusion (91% vs. 31%, P = 0.0008) and death from
haemorrhage (46% vs. 5%, P = 0.0014) [39]. However, these data
were not compared to the performance of the routine tests.
The diagnosis of hyper ﬁbrinolysis by VETs therefore has a
prognostic value, conﬁrming the very high severity of hyper
ﬁbrinolysis in severe trauma patients. The complete lysis of the clot
in less than 60 minutes is predictive of mortality ranging from 86%
to 96%, according to the series. However, VET lack sensitivity to the
activation of ﬁbrinolysis and cannot guide antiﬁbrinolytic treat-
ment. In addition, the CRASH-2 study showed that routine
administration of tranexamic acid in the ﬁrst 3 hours after injury
reduces the mortality of trauma patients with haemorrhage or risk
of haemorrhage [40]. Beyond the deadline of 3 hours the beneﬁt of
S. Roullet et al. / Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 38 (2019) 539–548
542
tranexamic acid is questionable, particularly in patients without
hyper ﬁbrinolysis [41–43]. In this situation, guidance by VETs
should be envisaged, keeping in mind that the speciﬁcity of these
tests is better than their sensitivity.
The GIHP proposes that VETs, which have a poor performance in
diagnosing the activation of ﬁbrinolysis, should not guide the
administration of tranexamic acid but that it should be adminis-
tered as soon as possible. However, detection of hyper ﬁbrinolysis
by VETs is a predictor of mortality.
The use of protocols, and especially adherence to them,
improves the prognosis of trauma patients, be it protocols for
comprehensive management of severe trauma or mass transfusion
protocols [44,45]. The inclusion of haemostasis tests in protocols
for the management of haemorrhage may be beneﬁcial. Several
‘‘before-after’’ cohort studies concluded that the inclusion of VETs
in mass transfusion protocols could improve the prognosis of
patients or reduce transfusion needs, both with TEG1 [46,47] and
ROTEM1 [48]. However, their methodology does not allow
conclusions to be drawn about the value of VETs, as they evaluated
the implementation of a protocol including VET with no protocol or
historical or scoring data.
A single randomised trial was conducted in trauma patients to
assess the value of VETs in guiding ACT treatment. This single-
centre trial compared two protocols for massive transfusion, one
based on TEG1 performed on de-shocking, the other on routine
tests for 111 severe trauma patients [49]. Mortality at 28 days was
reduced in the group whose management was guided by TEG1,
with a decrease in deaths occurring mainly in the ﬁrst 6 hours.
Transfused amounts of RBC, fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and platelets
were comparable. The group receiving the routine tests received
more platelets and FFP early compared to the TEG1 group. At hour
24, only the amount of ﬁbrinogen administered was different,
being higher in the group managed with routine tests.
The GIHP proposes that VETs be included in ACT algorithms, so
that labile blood products and factor concentrates may be given
based on pre-established thresholds. Prospective multicentric
studies evaluating these algorithms are necessary. These diagnos-
tic algorithms for coagulopathy must be part of a comprehensive
approach to the management of severe trauma patients in which
the main objective is to treat the cause of the bleeding.
5. Postpartum haemorrhage
Postpartum haemorrhage (PPH) remains one of the main causes
of maternal morbidity and mortality, accounting for nearly 30% of
direct maternal deaths (approximately 150 000 deaths per year
worldwide). In most cases, haemorrhage comes from the site of
placental insertion and is worse in an atonic uterus. The presence
of coagulopathy is observed in more than 20% of so-called
complicated deliveries (haemorrhage requiring transfusion of
RBC, insertion pathologies of the placenta, amniotic embolism,
foetal death in utero).
Although 
there 
is 
consensus 
on 
rapid 
and 
progressive
management algorithms including uterine revision, uterotonic
drugs, local control of bleeding by interventional radiology or
surgery, how to monitor coagulation and the resulting treatments
are more debated [50,51]. In this setting, early coagulopathy
predicts the progression of bleeding (discontinuation of bleeding
or progression to severe haemorrhage). Indeed, the ﬁbrinogen
concentration at the time of the diagnosis of PPH is predictive of
the severity of bleeding. In 128 patients with PPH requiring
prostaglandin E2 administration, a ﬁbrinogen concentration  2 g/
L measured in the laboratory had a 100% predictive value of severe
PPH [52]. The question arises of the rapid determination of
coagulation and ﬁbrinogen by VETs. In a prospective observational
study that included 37 women with PPH, FIBTEM A5, A15 and MCF
were strongly correlated with laboratory-measured ﬁbrinogen
concentrations (r = 0.86, 0.84 and 0.85 respectively) [53]. Thus, a
threshold of FIBTEM A5 at 6 mm and A15 at 8 mm detects hypo
ﬁbrinogenemia < 2 g/L with excellent sensitivity (100%) but a
lower speciﬁcity (respectively 87% and 84%). However, in that
study, many patients with PPH and those without PPH had
ﬁbrinogen concentrations between 2 and 6 g/L and a FIBTEM A5
between 6 mm and 20 mm. The value of FIBTEM A5 as a biomarker
of PPH progression was conﬁrmed in a prospective study including
356 women with PPH: FIBTEM A5 < 10 mm was associated with
progression of bleeding [54]. In a recent prospective study
including 55 women with PPH, FIBTEM A5 < 12 mm was the
threshold below which ﬁbrinogen administration led to less blood
transfusion and less bleeding [55,56]. In 2016, the SSC of ISTH for
the management of coagulopathy associated with PPH recom-
mended the monitoring of haemostasis either by VETs or by TQ/
aPTT and ﬁbrinogen and the transfusion of FFP and/or ﬁbrinogen
according to the biological results [57].
Fibrinolytic activity decreases during pregnancy. Within 1 hour
of delivery, plasma t-PA concentrations double and ﬁbrinolysis
increases rapidly to reach its peak at three hours postpartum.
Fibrinolysis is even greater in patients with PPH [50]. Recent
recommendations suggest the use of tranexamic acid in the event
of PPH with variable protocols [58]. Recently, the results of the
WOMAN study conﬁrmed the role of tranexamic acid in the
management of PPH with a reduction in maternal deaths by
haemorrhage and in the number of laparotomies for haemostasis
without adverse effects, especially since tranexamic acid was
administered early [59]. After the third hour after delivery, the
beneﬁt of tranexamic acid is more questionable. VET-guidance
could be considered, but further studies are needed to identify the
most suitable tests and thresholds.
In 2015, Mallaiah et al. showed that the use of a ROTEM1-based
algorithm for PPH management resulted in a reduction of total
blood transfusion and bleeding [60]. These results were conﬁrmed
in the recent study by Snegovskikh et al. [61].
In the setting of PPH, a low ﬁbrinogen concentration is
associated with a change in PPH to severe haemorrhage. The
GIHP proposes that the ﬁbrinogen concentration should be rapidly
evaluated in the event of PPH and VETs may be useful in this
regard. Given the limitations of VETs in evaluating ﬁbrinolytic
activity, it is proposed not to guide the administration of
tranexamic acid on VETs but to administer it as soon as possible
in the event of PPH.
6. Cardiac surgery
Cardiac surgery is one of the clinical situations where the
contribution of VET monitoring has been the most studied, as
haemorrhage remains a major complication of cardiac surgery. The
causes of haemorrhage are multiple: complex surgery, preopera-
tive antiplatelet and/or anticoagulant treatment, persistence of
heparin despite protamine antagonism, consumption and dilution
of coagulation factors and platelets, etc. Such cases of haemorrhage
often require the administration of labile blood products or drugs
derived from blood and/or second-look surgery [62]. The value of
VETs is debatable only in the event of haemorrhagic complications
at the end of cardiac surgery, and several issues remain to be
validated before VETs can be included in a protocol. Classically,
VETs are used after the neutralization of heparin by protamine and
the return to optimal conditions of temperature, pH and ionized
calcium. In procedures with high haemorrhagic risk (reoperation,
circulatory assistance, transplantation), they could be used more
systematically. In all cases, a decision algorithm with well-deﬁned
and locally validated thresholds is essential.
S. Roullet et al. / Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 38 (2019) 539–548 
543
A recent meta-analysis summarised all studies published in
cardiac surgery [63]. Seventeen studies were selected, including
8332 patients with a comparison between a VET-guided arm
(ROTEM1 for 78.3% of patients) and an arm with conventional
tests. A reduction in transfusion support was observed in the VET-
guided arm (OR = 0.63, 95% CI 0.56–0.71) and was conﬁrmed in the
randomised studies subgroup (OR = 0.37, 95% CI 0.21–0.68). This
reduction mainly concerned the administration of FFP (OR = 0.31,
95% CI 0.13–0.74). Furthermore, clinical outcomes were improved
in the VET-group: signiﬁcant reduction in the incidence of acute
kidney injury, thromboembolic events and re-exploration due to
postoperative bleeding. The results of this work are in agreement
with those of the Bolliger and Tanaka study in 2013, which
analysed 12 studies, 7 of which were randomised, and which also
found 
an 
over-prescription 
of 
ﬁbrinogen 
concentrates 
and
prothrombin complex concentrates (PCC) (OR = 1.56, 95% CI
1.29–1.87 for ﬁbrinogen concentrates and OR = 1.74, 95% CI
1.40–2.18 for PCC) [64].
Two recent publications in particular provide arguments in
favour of VETs in cardiac surgery:
 the Cochrane study published in 2016 selected 17 studies
(1493 patients), the majority in cardiac surgery (96% of patients),
with an equivalent distribution between TEG1 and ROTEM1
(but especially ROTEM1 for the most recent studies), and an
associated functional platelet test in 5 studies. The analysis
showed a signiﬁcant reduction in transfusions of RBC (RR: 0.86,
95% CI 0.79–0.94), FFP (RR: 0.57, 95% CI 0.33–0,96) and platelets
(RR: 0.73; 95% CI: 0.60–0.88) with the use of VET. The results
demonstrate the beneﬁt of blood transfusion strategies, possibly
combined with a functional platelet test, but with a low level of
evidence (heterogeneity of studies, low numbers of patients)
[65]. Furthermore, this meta-analysis demonstrated a signiﬁ-
cant reduction in mortality in the VET-group (RR: 0.52, 95% CI
0.28–0.95), which was mainly based on trials using ROTEM1
(RR: 0.44, 95% CI 0.21–0.93). The reduction in mortality was still
signiﬁcant when VET-guided algorithms were compared to
standard laboratory testing guided algorithms (RR: 0.36, 95% CI
0.16–0.84). The Cochrane analysis also found a signiﬁcant
reduction in the incidence of acute kidney injury with the need
for dialysis (RR: 0.46, 95% CI 0.28–0.76), already reported by
Deppe et al.;
 the randomised study by Karkouti et al. (12 Canadian centres,
7402 patients) was conducted in two stages: initially no
monitoring, then use of ROTEM1 with an algorithm using
EXTEM CT and A10 and FIBTEM A10, and PlateletWorks1
(Helena Laboratories, Beaumont, Texas, USA). The use of
ROTEM1 was associated with a reduction in transfusion of
RBC (RR: 0.91, 95% CI: 0.85–0.98, P = 0.02), platelets (RR: 0.77;
95% CI: 0.68–0.87, P < 0.001), but not of plasma or factor
concentrates (ﬁbrinogen, cryoprecipitate and PCC). Monitoring
was associated with a signiﬁcant reduction in major bleeding,
but had no impact on complications, length of hospitalisation or
mortality [66].
It is difﬁcult to distinguish the impact of VETs from that of a
systematic approach with a deﬁned algorithm of the indication for
transfusion. However, these studies suggest that the indication for
transfusion based on real-time biological monitoring and a deﬁned
algorithm is associated with decreased transfusion and haemor-
rhagic complications. Looking at the mortality issue, the Cochrane
meta-analysis concluded in favour of the VET-guided algorithm,
compared to a deﬁned algorithm.
In cardiac surgery, the GIHP proposes that VETs should be used
in 
the 
event 
of 
haemorrhage 
at 
the 
end 
of 
surgery 
and
postoperatively. They are carried out essentially at the end of
ECC, rather after the neutralisation of heparin, to guide the
therapeutic strategy. The recommendation is that they should be
included in algorithms.
7. Liver transplantation
Liver transplantation (LT) is currently the only curative
treatment for severe hepatic impairment. The recipients present
differing degrees of preoperative haemostasis disorders and may
also 
present 
intraoperative 
coagulopathy. 
Cirrhotic 
patients
undergo complex changes in haemostasis. Coagulant and antico-
agulant proteins, which are synthesised mainly by the liver,
decrease simultaneously with hepatic involvement, with the
notable exception of factor VIII. A new equilibrium is established
ensuring haemostasis is preserved but it is more tenuous, and the
patient may develop a haemorrhagic or thrombotic syndrome
[67]. Recipients with fulminant hepatitis have the same distur-
bances, but their von Willebrand factor (vWF) concentration is
generally high with a low concentration of ADAMTS13, resulting in
balanced haemostasis [68]. These abnormalities result in abnormal
results on the routine coagulation tests, which lead to the incorrect
diagnosis of a haemorrhagic risk. However, these tests (QT, for
example) do not predict haemorrhagic [69] or thrombotic risk
[70]. The routine tests evaluate only procoagulant factors without
taking 
into 
account 
the 
relationship 
with 
the 
coagulation
inhibiting systems [71]. This would explain the absence of
abnormal bleeding in minor surgery or even interventions that
carry a higher risk of bleeding in cirrhotic patients who have not
received 
prophylactic 
transfusion 
of 
FFP 
and/or 
platelets
[72,73]. Changes in the production and clearance of coagulation
proteins in the course of LT may lead to severely disturbed
haemostasis, further aggravated by ischemia of the hepatic graft
and the splanchnic network [74].
Several studies have shown the value of VETs for reducing
recourse to transfusion in LT [75–78]. A single prospective,
randomised study compared transfusion based on TEG1 and
routine tests and showed a reduction in transfusion of FFP thanks
to the use of TEG1 [79]. Roullet et al. performed a prospective
before/after study (conventional strategy vs. ROTEM1-guided
strategy) including 60 patients that did not show a difference in
transfusion needs between groups [80]. However, FFP transfusion
was not included in the ROTEM1-guided group in which only
platelets and ﬁbrinogen transfusion was guided on ROTEM1. The
authors explained these results by a better understanding of the
physiology of coagulation and the coagulopathy linked to liver
disease 
and 
the 
improvement 
of 
bleeding 
and 
transfusion
management in LT because of the implementation of a written
protocol. This already resulted in a low transfusion rate that was
probably difﬁcult to lower more. Recourse to transfusion may vary
depending on the device used, conﬁrming that transfusion
thresholds are not well deﬁned [81–83]. According to a recent
study, a parameter derived from ROTEM1, the time required for
the maximum clotting velocity, can identify cirrhotic patients at
high risk of bleeding [84].
As with other haemorrhagic settings, LT studies have shown a
good correlation between FIBTEM A10 and ﬁbrinogen concentra-
tion, enabling a VET result to be obtained quickly [15,85–
87]. However, in the event of a major deﬁciency in ﬁbrinogen
(< 1 g/L), the correlation with FIBTEM MCF or the maximum TEG
FF amplitude lacks precision [77,88]. Hyper ﬁbrinolysis has been
described as a major cause of non-surgical bleeding during LT [89–
91]. Results concerning the value of ROTEM1 in the detection of
ﬁbrinolysis and its treatment are controversial [80,92]. Abuelka-
sem et al. found that FITBTEM was more sensitive to hyper
ﬁbrinolysis than EXTEM [93]. Recent data suggest that ﬁbrinolysis
is most often self-limiting in patients undergoing liver transplan-
S. Roullet et al. / Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 38 (2019) 539–548
544
tation [94]. Pre-anhepatic hyper ﬁbrinolysis detected by ROTEM1
is associated with increased 30-day and 6-month mortality
whereas post-anhepatic hyper ﬁbrinolysis is associated with an
increased incidence of portal vein and hepatic artery thrombosis
[95]. Systematic administration of anti-ﬁbrinolytic does not appear
to be necessary [96]. However, the reduction in transfusion
requirements based on the treatment of ﬁbrinolysis when detected
seems justiﬁed by the study by Trzebicki et al. [92].
VETs can be an aid in LT by limiting the transfusion of labile
blood products, probably at the cost of an increase in the
transfusion of ﬁbrinogen. VETs lack sensitivity for the diagnosis
of hyper ﬁbrinolysis. The GIHP proposes not waiting for the
appearance of typical hyper ﬁbrinolysis plots to use anti-
ﬁbrinolytics if other clinical features are present such as diffuse
or massive bleeding.
8. Paediatrics
Several reports on the use of VETs in paediatrics have been
published but few studies have focused on the management of
transfusions in childhood haemorrhagic surgery. Reference values
have been published in healthy newborns and children for TEG1
[97–104] and for ROTEM1 [105–110] as well as in children with
cyanogenic pathologies [103]. In newborns, while the routine tests
indicate a tendency to hypocoagulation, VETs show a hyper
coagulable proﬁle compared to that of adults until the age of
6 months. Given the very heterogeneous conditions in which VET
were performed in these studies, it is advisable to verify the
reference values used locally [111].
The largest number of studies involves cardiac surgery. The risk
of haemorrhage in children undergoing cardiac surgery with ECC is
very high, with most newborns and children in need of a signiﬁcant
transfusion of labile blood products. In this setting, VETs have been
used to predict the occurrence of bleeding events and to guide the
therapeutic strategy through the development of transfusion
algorithms speciﬁc to the paediatric cardiac population [65]. Stud-
ies that have attempted to evaluate the predictive value of VETs in
cardiac surgery have yielded contradictory and disappointing
results [112,113]. Neither routine coagulation tests nor VETs
performed prior to cardiac surgery predicted the occurrence of
perioperative haemorrhagic events.
Several transfusion algorithms have been published and can be
used and/or adapted to suit the habits and practices of each centre
[114,115]. Only one prospective randomized study compared the
efﬁcacy of a transfusion algorithm using ROTEM1 to an approach
based on routine tests [115]. While ROTEM1 allowed a reduction
in postoperative RBC and FFP transfusion requirements, it was
associated with an increase in intraoperative FFP and platelets
transfusions, so there was no overall difference. These results
conﬁrm those obtained in a retrospective study showing that the
use of an algorithm based on ROTEM1 allowed precise treatment
of coagulopathy, while leading to a greater use of ﬁbrinogen
[114]. As in adult cardiac surgery, while the use of VETs seems to
offer some beneﬁts in paediatric cardiac surgery, the level of
evidence remains low. Further prospective studies are therefore
required to assess the cost-beneﬁt of using VETs.
Data from the literature are signiﬁcantly sparser for other types
of surgery. Only one early study has been published in LT. This
descriptive study of the trajectories of TEG1 observed during the
different phases of LT revealed plots similar to those described in
adults [116]. Some reports have focused on polytraumatised
children, but these are only retrospective studies [117,118]. The
largest 
study 
was 
conducted 
over 
40 
years 
and 
involved
819 children. It showed a relationship between r-TEG ﬁbrinolysis
index at admission and mortality [118]. Most of the literature on
the use of thromboelastometry in craniosynostosis surgeries is
from the same team [119,120]. The results of these retrospective
studies with small numbers (9 to 47 children) suggest that
ROTEM1 can detect ﬁbrin polymerization disorders whereas the
ﬁbrinogen assay is not informative, that the transfusion threshold
of MCF FIBTEM can be increased, thereby reducing the transfusion
of FFP, and that this attitude does not entail additional costs. It
should be noted that the transfusion algorithm incorporates FXIII
administration according to laboratory results (response time
45 minutes) with a threshold for transfusion of FXIII set at 30%, or
even 60% in the event of an episode of massive bleeding. Another
team recently published a retrospective analysis showing the value
of ROTEM1 in predicting blood loss and guiding transfusion, but
transfusion algorithms were not clearly deﬁned [121].
In conclusion, there are not enough studies to deﬁne the role of
VETs in the perioperative management of children. Similarly,
European guidelines only suggest the use of VETs to rapidly detect
dilution coagulopathy or hyper ﬁbrinolysis (grade 2C) [122].
In paediatrics, VETs may be of value in cardiac surgery but the
algorithms including them are very different from one centre to
another. In other types of surgery, their putative role remains to be
established.
9. Bedside or in the lab?
In most studies on VETs, the time required to obtain the results
of routine tests is presented as a limiting factor in their use for the
management of perioperative haemorrhage [123]. The response
time in the laboratory can be explained by the many steps between
sampling and making the results available. Establishing dedicated
pathways for dealing with vital emergencies allowed results of
four tests useful in a perioperative setting (haematocrit, platelet
count, QT and ﬁbrinogen) to be made available in 14  3 minutes
[2,124]. Nevertheless, even if pre-analytical and analytical lead times
are optimised, the prospective study by Cotton et al. showed that the
results of routine tests took signiﬁcantly longer to be made available
than r-TEG results (48 min vs. 15 min respectively) [29]. The early
parameters of clot ﬁrmness (A5 and A10) validated for the ROTEM1
device are of 
great importance to enable 
turn-around 
time.
Accordingly, the implementation and validation of A5 in r-TEG could
reduce the time-to-result by more than 50% compared to MA
[125]. The timesaving argument, which is widely used, argues for the
devices to be positioned near the patient. In this case, they are used by
the nursing staff under the responsibility of the laboratory in
accordance with the regulations in force governing delocalised
biology [126]. The application of this regulation implies new activities
and responsibilities for the clinical and biological teams. Procedures
precisely deﬁning the role of each should be set up for the passage and
analysis of quality controls as well as for the protocol to be followed in
the event of a failed control, but also for the management of stocks
and the follow-up of maintenance procedures. Degraded procedures
must also be catered for if an analyser breaks down. Training in the
pre-analytical and analytical phases and in interpreting the results
together with validation of the healthcare staff by a biologist should
be organised with regular checking that the level of skills in
maintained.
These issues have led many centres to place these devices in the
central laboratory. In this case, the laboratory staff makes sure that
the analysis 
is performed 
correctly 
but special 
emergency
provisions must be set up to make sure that the whole procedural
ﬂow is smooth and rapid. The use of a pneumatic tube system
makes it possible to reduce lead times but may affect the pre-
analytical quality of the sample. In a recent study, transport by
pneumatic tube in the Hospices Civils de Lyon did not affect
ROTEM1 results [127]. However, each transport system must be
S. Roullet et al. / Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 38 (2019) 539–548 
545
validated locally (GFHT recommendations, October 2015) [128]. A
technician must be available 24 hours a day to ensure immediate
pick-up of samples. Rapid registration procedures to ensure
traceability must be clearly established. From the beginning of
the analytical phase, VET plots must be visible in real time by
means of screens easily visible in operating theatres, provided that
any clinical staff likely to use the result for diagnostic or
therapeutic purposes have been trained and authorized to
interpret it. The biological validation a posteriori of a result that
has been used is theoretically not allowed outside of delocalised
biology. A derogation procedure validated by clinicians and
biologists who meet in a consensus meeting must be formalised.
Placing a VET in the laboratory also means that the device can be
used for several care units. In France, devices are evenly distributed
between the operating room and the haemostasis laboratory. The
choice must be made according to systems organisations and
resources available locally, taking into account the regulations
referred to above.
Two other fully automated analysers, the TEG1 6S and the
ROTEM1 Sigma, which no longer require pipetting operations, have
recently been launched. Their handling is much simpler with
consumables in the form of cartridges ready for use, which is more
adapted to delocalised biology. However, these devices will not be
available to unauthorised staff as the pre-analytical phase is critical
as well as the correct interpretation of the various parameters.
Moreover, very few studies on this new generation of devices are
currently available and the reference values and the thresholds
deﬁned in the transfusion algorithms remain to be validated.
The decisive criteria for positioning a VET in the operating room
or laboratory are as follows:
 is the time required to obtain the laboratory results compatible
with optimal management of the bleeding patient?
 are information technology resources available?
 to apply the regulations relating to delocalised biology if the
device is placed in the operating room,
 to visualise real-time plots on easily visible screens when
positioned in the laboratory;
 the staff:
 when positioned in the operating room:
– number of people to be trained and staff turnover to assess
the feasibility of training and maintenance of skills. Will the
biologist be able to appoint persons responsible for the
maintenance and monitoring of the analyser under his/her
responsibility?
– if positioned in the laboratory, will the laboratory staff be
available 24 hours a day for immediate blood sampling and
use of the VET?
The choice and implementation of a VET can only be made
consensually between the clinical department and the laboratory.
10. Conclusion
VETs must be included in algorithms for the management of
coagulopathy and bleeding, deﬁned in each centre and for each
population of patients. While their value in the management of
trauma and in cardiac surgery seems clear, studies with a high level
of evidence are still lacking in obstetrics, liver transplantation and
paediatrics. In consultation with the biology laboratory, these devices
should be situated according to the way each centre functions.
Disclosure of interest
The authors declare that they have no competing interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Ray Cooke for copy-editing this article.
References
[1] Samama 
CM. 
Thromboelastography: 
the 
next 
step. 
Anesth 
Analg
2001;92:563–4.
[2] Chandler WL, Ferrell C, Trimble S, Moody S. Development of a rapid emer-
gency haemorrhage panel. Transfusion (Paris) 2010;50:2547–52.
[3] Chitlur M, Rivard GE, Lillicrap D, Mann K, Shima M, Young G, et al. Recom-
mendations for performing thromboelastography/thromboelastometry in
hemophilia: communication from the SSC of the ISTH. J Thromb Haemost
2014;12:103–6.
[4] Winearls J, Reade M, Miles H, Bulmer A, Campbell D, Go¨rlinger K, et al.
Targeted coagulation management in severe trauma: the controversies and
the evidence. Anesth Analg 2016;123:910–24.
[5] Gurbel PA, Bliden KP, Tantry US, Monroe AL, Muresan AA, Brunner NE, et al.
First report of the point-of-care TEG: a technical validation study of the TEG-
6S system. Platelets 2016;27:642–9.
[6] Ortmann E, Rubino A, Altemimi B, Collier T, Besser MW, Klein AA. Validation
of viscoelastic coagulation tests during cardiopulmonary bypass. J Thromb
Haemost 2015;13:1207–16.
[7] Lang T, Toller W, Gu¨ tl M, Mahla E, Metzler H, Rehak P, et al. Different effects
of abciximab and cytochalasin D on clot strength in thrombelastography. J
Thromb Haemost 2004;2:147–53.
[8] Schlimp CJ, Solomon C, Ranucci M, Hochleitner G, Redl H, Scho¨chl H. The
effectiveness of different functional ﬁbrinogen polymerization assays in
eliminating platelet contribution to clot strength in thromboelastometry.
Anesth Analg 2014;118:269–76.
[9] Venema LF, Post WJ, Hendriks HG, Huet RC, de Wolf JT, de Vries AJ. An
assessment of clinical interchangeability of TEG(R) and RoTEM(R) thromboe-
lastographic variables in cardiac surgical patients. Anesth Analg 2010;
111:339–44.
[10] Ogawa S, Szlam F, Bolliger D, Nishimura T, Chen EP, Tanaka KA. The impact of
hematocrit on ﬁbrin clot formation assessed by rotational thromboelasto-
metry. Anesth Analg 2012;115:16–21.
[11] Herbstreit F, Winter EM, Peters J, Hartmann M. Monitoring of haemostasis in
liver transplantation: comparison of laboratory based and point of care tests.
Anaesthesia 2010;65:44–9.
[12] Mace H, Lightfoot N, McCluskey S, Selby R, Roy D, Timoumi T, et al. Validity of
thromboelastometry for rapid assessment of ﬁbrinogen levels in heparinized
samples during cardiac surgery: a retrospective, single-center, observational
study. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2016;30:90–5.
[13] Erdoes G, Gerster G, Colucci G, Kaiser H, Alberio L, Eberle B. Prediction of post-
weaning ﬁbrinogen status during cardiopulmonary bypass: an observational
study in 110 patients. PloS One 2015;10:e0126692.
[14] Olde Engberink RHG, Kuiper GJAJM, Wetzels RJH, Nelemans PJ, Lance MD,
Beckers EAM, et al. Rapid and correct prediction of thrombocytopenia and
hypoﬁbrinogenemia with rotational thromboelastometry in cardiac surgery.
J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2014;28:210–6.
[15] Song JG, Jeong SM, Jun IG, Lee HM, Hwang GS. Five-minute parameter of
thromboelastometry is sufﬁcient to detect thrombocytopenia and hypoﬁ-
brinogenaemia in patients undergoing liver transplantation. Br J Anaesth
2014;112:290–7.
[16] Scho¨chl H, Cotton B, Inaba K, Nienaber U, Fischer H, Voelckel W, et al. FIBTEM
provides early prediction of massive transfusion in trauma. Crit Care
2011;15:R265.
[17] Schmidt DE, Holmstro¨m M, Majeed A, Na¨slin D, Walle´n H, A˚ gren A. Detection
of elevated INR by thromboelastometry and thromboelastography in warfa-
rin treated patients and healthy controls. Thromb Res 2015;135:1007–11.
[18] Blasi A, Mun˜oz G, de Soto I, Mellado R, Taura P, Rios J, et al. Reliability of
thromboelastometry for detecting the safe coagulation threshold in patients
taking acenocoumarol after elective heart valve replacement. Thromb Res
2015;136:669–72.
[19] Dunham CM, Rabel C, Hileman BM, Schiraldi J, Chance EA, Shima MT, et al.
TEG1 and RapidTEG1 are unreliable for detecting warfarin-coagulopathy: a
prospective cohort study. Thromb J 2014;12:4.
[20] Agren A, Wikman AT, Ostlund A, Edgren G. TEG1 functional ﬁbrinogen
analysis may overestimate ﬁbrinogen levels. Anesth Analg 2014;118:933–5.
[21] Fenger-Eriksen C, Moore GW, Rangarajan S, Ingerslev J, Sorensen B. Fibrino-
gen estimates are inﬂuenced by methods of measurement and hemodilution
with colloid plasma expanders. Transfusion (Paris) 2010;50:2571–6.
[22] Schlimp CJ, Cadamuro J, Solomon C, Redl H, Scho¨chl H. The effect of ﬁbrinogen
concentrate and factor XIII on thromboelastometry in 33% diluted blood with
albumin, gelatine, hydroxyethyl starch or saline in vitro. Blood Transfus
2013;11:510–7.
[23] David J-S, Durand M, Levrat A, Lefevre M, Rugeri L, Geay-Baillat M-O, et al.
Correlation between laboratory coagulation testing and thromboelastometry
is modiﬁed during management of trauma patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg
2016;81:319–27.
[24] Lang T, Bauters A, Braun SL, Potzsch B, von Pape KW, Kolde HJ, et al. Multi-
centre investigation on reference ranges for ROTEM thromboelastometry.
Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 2005;16:301–10.
S. Roullet et al. / Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 38 (2019) 539–548
546
[25] Kitchen DP, Kitchen S, Jennings I, Woods T, Walker I. Quality assurance and
quality control of thrombelastography and rotational thromboelastometry:
the UK NEQAS for blood coagulation experience. Semin Thromb Hemost
2010;36:757–63.
[26] Veigas PV, Callum J, Rizoli S, Nascimento B, da Luz LT. A systematic review on
the rotational thrombelastometry (ROTEM1) values for the diagnosis of
coagulopathy, prediction and guidance of blood transfusion and prediction
of mortality in trauma patients. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med
2016;24:114.
[27] Tauber H, Innerhofer P, Breitkopf R, Westermann I, Beer R, El Attal R, et al.
Prevalence and impact of abnormal ROTEM(R) assays in severe blunt trauma:
results of the ‘‘Diagnosis and Treatment of Trauma-Induced Coagulopathy
(DIA-TRE-TIC) study.’’. Br J Anaesth 2011;107:378–87.
[28] Davenport R, Manson J, De’ath H, Platton S, Coates A, Allard S, et al. Functional
deﬁnition and characterization of acute traumatic coagulopathy. Crit Care
Med 2011;39:2652–8.
[29] Cotton BA, Faz G, Hatch QM, Radwan ZA, Podbielski J, Wade C, et al. Rapid
thrombelastography delivers real-time results that predict transfusion with-
in 1 hour of admission. J Trauma 2011;71:407–14.
[30] Hagemo JS, Christiaans SC, Stanworth SJ, Brohi K, Johansson PI, Goslings JC,
et al. Detection of acute traumatic coagulopathy and massive transfusion
requirements by means of rotational thromboelastometry: an international
prospective validation study. Crit Care Lond Engl 2015;19:97.
[31] Holcomb JB, Minei KM, Scerbo ML, Radwan ZA, Wade CE, Kozar RA, et al.
Admission rapid thrombelastography can replace conventional coagulation
tests in the emergency department: experience with 1974 consecutive trau-
ma patients. Ann Surg 2012;256:476–86.
[32] Einersen PM, Moore EE, Chapman MP, Moore HB, Gonzalez E, Silliman CC,
et al. Rapid thrombelastography thresholds for goal-directed resuscitation
of patients at risk for massive transfusion. J Trauma Acute Care Surg
2017;82:114–9.
[33] Rugeri L, Levrat A, David JS, Delecroix E, Floccard B, Gros A, et al. Diagnosis of
early coagulation abnormalities in trauma patients by rotation thrombelas-
tography. J Thromb Haemost 2007;5:289–95.
[34] Rourke C, Curry N, Khan S, Taylor R, Raza I, Davenport R, et al. Fibrinogen
levels during trauma haemorrhage, response to replacement therapy, and
association with patient outcomes. J Thromb Haemost 2012;10:1342–51.
[35] Meyer MAS, Ostrowski SR, Sørensen AM, Meyer ASP, Holcomb JB, Wade CE,
et al. Fibrinogen in trauma, an evaluation of thrombelastography and rota-
tional thromboelastometry ﬁbrinogen assays. J Surg Res 2015;194:581–90.
[36] Raza I, Davenport R, Rourke C, Platton S, Manson J, Spoors C, et al. The
incidence and magnitude of ﬁbrinolytic activation in trauma patients. J
Thromb Haemost 2013;11:307–14.
[37] Kashuk JL, Moore EE, Sawyer M, Wohlauer M, Pezold M, Barnett C, et al.
Primary ﬁbrinolysis is integral in the pathogenesis of the acute coagulopathy
of trauma. Ann Surg 2010;128:22–33.
[38] Levrat A, Gros A, Rugeri L, Inaba K, Floccard B, Negrier C, et al. Evaluation of
rotation thrombelastography for the diagnosis of hyper ﬁbrinolysis in trauma
patients. Br J Anaesth 2008;100:792–7.
[39] Chapman MP, Moore EE, Ramos CR, Ghasabyan A, Harr JN, Chin TL, et al.
Fibrinolysis greater than 3% is the critical value for initiation of antiﬁbrino-
lytic therapy. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2013;75:961–7.
[40] Shakur H, Roberts I, Bautista R, Caballero J, Coats T, Dewan Y, et al. Effects of
tranexamic acid on death, vascular occlusive events, and blood transfusion in
trauma patients with signiﬁcant haemorrhage (CRASH-2): a randomised,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2010;376:23–32.
[41] Roberts I, Shakur H, Afolabi A, Brohi K, Coats T, et al. The importance of early
treatment with tranexamic acid in bleeding trauma patients: an exploratory
analysis of the CRASH-2 randomised controlled trial. Lancet Lond Engl
2011;377:1096–101.
[42] Moore HB, Moore EE, Huebner BR, Stettler GR, Nunns GR, Einersen PM, et al.
Tranexamic acid is associated with increased mortality in patients with
physiological ﬁbrinolysis. J Surg Res 2017;220:438–43.
[43] Leeper CM, Neal MD, McKenna CJ, Gaines BA. Trending ﬁbrinolytic dysregu-
lation: ﬁbrinolysis shutdown in the days after injury is associated with poor
outcome in severely injured children. Ann Surg 2017;266:508–15.
[44] Godier A, Bacus M, Kipnis E, Tavernier B, Guidat A, Rauch A, et al. Compliance
with evidence-based clinical management guidelines in bleeding trauma
patients. Br J Anaesth 2016;117:592–600.
[45] Cotton BA, Au BK, Nunez TC, Gunter OL, Robertson AM, Young PP. Predeﬁned
massive transfusion protocols are associated with a reduction in organ failure
and postinjury complications. J Trauma 2009;66:41–8.
[46] Kashuk JL, Moore EE, Wohlauer M, Johnson JL, Pezold M, Lawrence J, et al. Initial
experiences with point-of-care rapid thrombelastography for management of
life-threatening postinjury coagulopathy. Transfusion (Paris) 2012;52:23–33.
[47] Johansson PI, Sørensen AM, Larsen CF, Windeløv NA, Stensballe J, Perner A,
et al. Low haemorrhage-related mortality in trauma patients in a Level I
trauma center employing transfusion packages and early thromboelastogra-
phy-directed hemostatic resuscitation with plasma and platelets. Transfu-
sion (Paris) 2013;53:3088–99.
[48] Scho¨chl H, Nienaber U, Hofer G, Voelckel W, Jambor C, Scharbert G, et al. Goal-
directed coagulation management of major trauma patients using throm-
boelastometry (ROTEM)-guided administration of ﬁbrinogen concentrate
and prothrombin complex concentrate. Crit Care 2010;14:R55.
[49] Gonzalez E, Moore EE, Moore HB, Chapman MP, Chin TL, Ghasabyan A, et al.
Goal-directed hemostatic resuscitation of trauma-induced coagulopathy: a
pragmatic randomized clinical trial comparing a viscoelastic assay to con-
ventional coagulation assays. Ann Surg 2016;263:1051–9.
[50] Solomon C, Collis RE, Collins PW. Haemostatic monitoring during postpartum
haemorrhage and implications for management. Br J Anaesth 2012;109:851–63.
[51] Karlsson O, Jeppsson A, Hellgren M. Major obstetric haemorrhage: monitor-
ing with thromboelastography, laboratory analyses or both? Int J Obstet
Anesth 2014;23:10–7.
[52] Charbit B, Mandelbrot L, Samain E, Baron G, Haddaoui B, Keita H, et al. The
decrease of ﬁbrinogen is an early predictor of the severity of postpartum
haemorrhage. J Thromb Haemost 2007;5:266–73.
[53] Huissoud C, Carrabin N, Audibert F, Levrat A, Massignon D, Berland M, et al.
Bedside assessment of ﬁbrinogen level in postpartum haemorrhage by
thrombelastometry. BJOG Int J Obstet Gynaecol 2009;116:1097–102.
[54] Collins PW, Lilley G, Bruynseels D, Laurent DB-S, Cannings-John R, Precious E,
et al. Fibrin-based clot formation as an early and rapid biomarker for
progression of postpartum haemorrhage: a prospective study. Blood 2014;
124:1727–36.
[55] Collins PW, Cannings-John R, Bruynseels D, Mallaiah S, Dick J, Elton C, et al.
Viscoelastometric-guided early ﬁbrinogen concentrate replacement during
postpartum haemorrhage: OBS2, a double-blind randomized controlled trial.
Br J Anaesth 2017;119:411–21.
[56] Collins PW, Cannings-John R, Bruynseels D, Mallaiah S, Dick J, Elton C, et al.
Viscoelastometry guided fresh frozen plasma infusion for postpartum hae-
morrhage: OBS2, an observational study. Br J Anaesth 2017;119:422–34.
[57] Collins P, Abdul-Kadir R, Thachil J. Subcommittees on women’s health issues in
thrombosis and haemostasis and on disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Management of coagulopathy associated with postpartum haemorrhage: guid-
ance from the SSC of the ISTH. J Thromb Haemost 2016;14:205–10.
[58] Shaylor R, Weiniger CF, Austin N, Tzabazis A, Shander A, Goodnough LT, et al.
National and international guidelines for patient blood management in
obstetrics: a qualitative review. Anesth Analg 2017;124:216–32.
[59] Shakur H, Roberts I, Fawole B, Chaudhri R, El-Sheikh M, Akintan A, et al. Effect
of early tranexamic acid administration on mortality, hysterectomy, and
other morbidities in women with post-partum haemorrhage (WOMAN): an
international, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet
2017;389:2105–16.
[60] Mallaiah S, Barclay P, Harrod I, Chevannes C, Bhalla A. Introduction of an
algorithm for ROTEM-guided ﬁbrinogen concentrate administration in major
obstetric haemorrhage. Anaesthesia 2015;70:166–75.
[61] Snegovskikh D, Souza D, Walton Z, Dai F, Rachler R, Garay A, et al. Point-of-
care viscoelastic testing improves the outcome of pregnancies complicated
by severe postpartum haemorrhage. J Clin Anesth 2018;44:50–6.
[62] Murphy GJ, Reeves BC, Rogers CA, Rizvi SIA, Culliford L, Angelini GD. Increased
mortality, postoperative morbidity, and cost after red blood cell transfusion
in patients having cardiac surgery. Circulation 2007;116:2544–52.
[63] Deppe A-C, Weber C, Zimmermann J, Kuhn EW, Slottosch I, Liakopoulos OJ,
et al. Point-of-care thromboelastography/thromboelastometry-based coagu-
lation management in cardiac surgery: a meta-analysis of 8332 patients. J
Surg Res 2016;203:424–33.
[64] Bolliger D, Tanaka KA. Roles of thrombelastography and thromboelastometry
for patient blood management in cardiac surgery. Transfus Med Rev
2013;27:213–20.
[65] Wikkelsø A, Wetterslev J, Møller AM, Afshari A. Thromboelastography (TEG)
or thromboelastometry (ROTEM) to monitor haemostatic treatment versus
usual care in adults or children with bleeding. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2016;CD007871.
[66] Karkouti K, Callum J, Wijeysundera DN, Rao V, Crowther M, Grocott HP, et al.
Point-of-care hemostatic testing in cardiac surgery: a stepped-wedge clus-
tered randomized controlled trial. Circulation 2016;134:1152–62.
[67] Lisman T, Porte RJ. Rebalanced haemostasis in patients with liver disease:
evidence and clinical consequences. Blood 2010;116:878–85.
[68] Lisman T, Bongers TN, Adelmeijer J, Janssen HL, de Maat MP, de Groot PG, et al.
Elevated levels of von Willebrand Factor in cirrhosis support platelet adhe-
sion despite reduced functional capacity. Hepatology 2006;44:53–61.
[69] Tripodi A, Salerno F, Chantarangkul V, Clerici M, Cazzaniga M, Primignani M,
et al. Evidence of normal thrombin generation in cirrhosis despite abnormal
conventional coagulation tests. Hepatology 2005;41:553–8.
[70] Søgaard KK, Horva´th-Puho´ E, Grønbaek H, Jepsen P, Vilstrup H, Sørensen HT.
Risk of venous thromboembolism in patients with liver disease: a nationwide
population-based case-control study. Am J Gastroenterol 2009;104:96–101.
[71] Tripodi A, Primignani M, Chantarangkul V, Dell’Era A, Clerici M, de Franchis R,
et al. An imbalance of pro- vs. anti-coagulation factors in plasma from
patients with cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2009;137:2105–11.
[72] Ewe K. Bleeding after liver biopsy does not correlate with indices of periph-
eral coagulation. Dig Dis Sci 1981;26:388–93.
[73] Perdiga˜o JPV, de Almeida PC, Rocha TDS, Mota MRL, Soares ECS, Alves APNN,
et al. Postoperative bleeding after dental extraction in liver pretransplant
patients. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2012;70:e177–84.
[74] Ozier Y, Steib A, Ickx B, Nathan N, Derlon A, Guay J, et al. Haemostatic
disorders during liver transplantation. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2001;18:208–18.
[75] Wang SC, Shieh JF, Chang KY, Chu YC, Liu CS, Loong CC, et al. Thromboelasto-
graphy-guided transfusion decreases intraoperative blood transfusion during
orthotopic liver transplantation: randomized clinical trial. Transplant Proc
2010;42:2590–3.
[76] Sabate A, Dalmau A, Koo M, Aparicio I, Costa M, Contreras L. Coagulopathy
management in liver transplantation. Transplant Proc 2012;44:1523–5.
S. Roullet et al. / Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 38 (2019) 539–548 
547
[77] Yang Lu S, Tanaka KA, Abuelkasem E, Planinsic RM, Sakai T. Clinical applica-
bility of rapid thrombelastography and functional ﬁbrinogen thrombelasto-
graphy to adult liver transplantation. Liver Transpl 2014;20:1097–105.
[78] Abeysundara L, Mallett S, Clevenger B. Point-of-care testing in liver disease
and liver surgery. Semin Thromb Hemost 2017;43:407–15.
[79] Wang S-C, Lin H-T, Chang K-Y, Mandell MS, Ting C-K, Chu Y-C, et al. Use of
higher thromboelastogram transfusion values is not associated with greater
blood loss in liver transplant surgery. Liver Transpl 2012;18:1253–7.
[80] Roullet S, Freyburger G, Cruc M, Quinart A, Stecken L, Audy M, et al. Manage-
ment of bleeding and transfusion during liver transplantation before and
after the introduction of a rotational thromboelastometry-based algorithm.
Liver Transpl 2015;21:169–79.
[81] Coakley M, Reddy K, Mackie I, Mallett S. Transfusion triggers in orthotopic
liver transplantation: a comparison of the thromboelastometry analyzer, the
thromboelastogram, and conventional coagulation tests. J Cardiothorac Vasc
Anesth 2006;20:548–53.
[82] Abuelkasem E, Mazzefﬁ MA, Lu SY, Planinsic RM, Sakai T, Tanaka KA. Ex vivo
evaluation of 4 different viscoelastic assays for detecting moderate to severe
coagulopathy during liver transplantation. Liver Transpl 2016;22:468–75.
[83] Clevenger B, Mallett SV. Transfusion and coagulation management in liver
transplantation. World J Gastroenterol 2014;20:6146.
[84] Tafur LA, Taura P, Blasi A, Beltran J, Martinez-Palli G, Balust J, et al. Rotation
thromboelastometry velocity curve predicts blood loss during liver trans-
plantation. Br J Anaesth 2016;117:741–8.
[85] BlasiA,BeltranJ,PereiraA,Martinez-PalliG,TorrentsA,BalustJ,etal.Anassessment
of thromboelastometry to monitor blood coagulation and guide transfusion sup-
port in liver transplantation. Transfusion (Paris) 2012;52:1989–98.
[86] Roullet S, Pillot J, Freyburger G, Biais M, Quinart A, Rault A, et al. Rotation
thromboelastometry detects thrombocytopenia and hypoﬁbrinogenaemia
during orthotopic liver transplantation. Br J Anaesth 2010;104:422–8.
[87] Tripodi A, Primignani M, Chantarangkul V, Viscardi Y, Dell’Era A, Fabris FM,
et al. The coagulopathy of cirrhosis assessed by thromboelastometry and its
correlation 
with 
conventional 
coagulation 
parameters. 
Thromb 
Res
2009;124:132–6.
[88] Seo H, Choi J-H, Moon Y-J, Jeong S-M. FIBTEM of thromboelastometry does
not accurately represent ﬁbrinogen concentration in patients with severe
hypoﬁbrinogenemia during liver transplantation. Ann Transplant 2015;20:
342–50.
[89] Porte RJ, Bontempo FA, Knot EA, Lewis JH, Kang YG, Starzl TE. Tissue-type-
plasminogen-activator-associated ﬁbrinolysis in orthotopic liver transplan-
tation. Transplant Proc 1989;21:3542.
[90] Ozier Y, Tsou M-Y. Changing trends in transfusion practice in liver trans-
plantation. Curr Opin Organ Transplant 2008;13:304–9.
[91] Roullet S, Freyburger G, Labrouche S, Morisse E, Stecken L, Quinart A, et al.
Hyper ﬁbrinolysis during liver transplantation is associated with bleeding.
Thromb Haemost 2015;113:1145–8.
[92] Trzebicki J, Flakiewicz E, Kosieradzki M, Blaszczyk B, Kolacz M, Jureczko L,
et al. The use of thromboelastometry in the assessment of haemostasis during
orthotopic liver transplantation reduces the demand for blood products. Ann
Transplant 2010;15:19–24.
[93] Abuelkasem E, Lu S, Tanaka K, Planinsic R, Sakai T. Comparison between
thrombelastography and thromboelastometry in hyper ﬁbrinolysis detection
during adult liver transplantation. Br J Anaesth 2016;116:507–12.
[94] Poon K-S, Chen C-C, Thorat A, Chiang Y-Y, Jeng L-B, Yang H-R, et al. Fibrino-
lysis after reperfusion of liver graft. Acta Anaesthesiol Taiwan 2015;53:41–3.
[95] Shimauchi T, Yamaura K, Higashi M, Abe K, Yoshizumi T, Hoka S. Fibrinolysis
in living donor liver transplantation recipients evaluated using thromboe-
lastometry: impact on mortality. Transplant Proc 2017;49:2117–21.
[96] Schoﬁeld N, Sugavanam A, Thompson K, Mallett SV. No increase in blood
transfusions during liver transplantation since the withdrawal of aprotinin.
Liver Transpl 2014;20:584–90.
[97] Miller BE, Bailey JM, Mancuso TJ, Weinstein MS, Holbrook GW, Silvey EM,
et al. Functional maturity of the coagulation system in children: an evalua-
tion using thrombelastography. Anesth Analg 1997;84:745–8.
[98] Pivalizza EG, Pivalizza PJ, Gottschalk LI, Kee S, Szmuk P, Abramson DC. Celite-
activated thrombelastography in children. J Clin Anesth 2001;13:20–3.
[99] Kettner SC, Pollak A, Zimpfer M, Seybold T, Prusa AR, Herkner K, et al.
Heparinase-modiﬁed thrombelastography in term and preterm neonates.
Anesth Analg 2004;98:1650–2.
[100] Rajwal S, Richards M, O’Meara M. The use of recalciﬁed citrated whole
blood – a pragmatic approach for thromboelastography in children. Paediatr
Anaesth 2004;14:656–60.
[101] Chan K-L, Summerhayes RG, Ignjatovic V, Horton SB, Monagle PT. Reference
values for kaolin-activated thromboelastography in healthy children. Anesth
Analg 2007;105:1610–3.
[102] Edwards RM, Naik-Mathuria BJ, Gay AN, Olutoye OO, Teruya J. Parameters of
thromboelastography in healthy newborns. Am J Clin Pathol 2008;130:99–102.
[103] Rafﬁni L, Schwed A, Zheng XL, Tanzer M, Nicolson S, Gaynor JW, et al.
Thromboelastography of patients after Fontan compared with healthy chil-
dren. Pediatr Cardiol 2009;30:771–6.
[104] Sewell EK, Forman KR, Wong ECC, Gallagher M, Luban NLC, Massaro AN.
Thromboelastography in term neonates: an alternative approach to evaluat-
ing coagulopathy. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2017;102:F79–84.
[105] Strauss T, Levy-Shraga Y, Ravid B, Schushan-Eisen I, Maayan-Metzger A, Kuint
J, et al. Clot formation of neonates tested by thromboelastography correlates
with gestational age. Thromb Haemost 2010;103:344–50.
[106] Oswald E, Stalzer B, Heitz E, Weiss M, Schmugge M, Strasak A, et al. Throm-
boelastometry (ROTEM(R)) in children: age-related reference ranges and
correlations with standard coagulation tests. Br J Anaesth 2010;105:827–35.
[107] Sokou R, Foudoulaki-Paparizos L, Lytras T, Konstantinidi A, Theodoraki M,
Lambadaridis I, et al. Reference ranges of thromboelastometry in healthy full-
term and pre-term neonates. Clin Chem Lab Med 2017;55:1592–7.
[108] Haizinger B, Gombotz H, Rehak P, Geiselseder G, Mair R. Activated throm-
belastogram in neonates and infants with complex congenital heart disease
in comparison with healthy children. Br J Anaesth 2006;97:545–52.
[109] Ravn HB, Andreasen JB, Hvas A-M. Does whole blood coagulation analysis
reﬂect developmental haemostasis? Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis Int J Haemost
Thromb 2017;28:218–23.
[110] Kim JY, Shin YR, Kil HK, Park MR, Lee JW. Reference intervals of thromboe-
lastometric evaluation of coagulation in pediatric patients with congenital
heart diseases: a retrospective investigation. Med Sci Monit Int Med J Exp Clin
Res 2016;22:3576–87.
[111] Horowitz GL. Deﬁning, establishing and verifying reference intervals in the
clinical laboratory: approved guideline. Wayne, Pa: Clinical and Laboratory
Standards Institute; 2008.
[112] Hayashi T, Sakurai Y, Fukuda K, Yada K, Ogiwara K, Matsumoto T, et al.
Correlations between global clotting function tests, duration of operation,
and postoperative chest tube drainage in pediatric cardiac surgery. Paediatr
Anaesth 2011;21:865–71.
[113] Faraoni D, Willems A, Savan V, Demanet H, De Ville A, Van der Linden P.
Plasma ﬁbrinogen concentration is correlated with postoperative blood loss
in children undergoing cardiac surgery. A retrospective review. Eur J Anaes-
thesiol 2014;31:317–26.
[114] Romlin BS, Wa˚ hlander H, Berggren H, Synnergren M, Baghaei F, Nilsson K,
et al. Intraoperative thromboelastometry is associated with reduced trans-
fusion prevalence in pediatric cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg 2011;112:30–6.
[115] Nakayama Y, Nakajima Y, Tanaka KA, Sessler DI, Maeda S, Iida J, et al.
Thromboelastometry-guided intraoperative haemostatic management redu-
ces bleeding and red cell transfusion after paediatric cardiac surgery. Br J
Anaesth 2015;114:91–102.
[116] Kang Y, Borland LM, Picone J, Martin LK. Intraoperative coagulation changes
in children undergoing liver transplantation. Anesthesiology 1989;71:44–7.
[117] Vogel AM, Radwan ZA, Cox CS, Cotton BA. Admission rapid thrombelasto-
graphy delivers real-time ‘‘actionable’’ data in pediatric trauma. J Pediatr
Surg 2013;48:1371–6.
[118] Liras IN, Cotton BA, Cardenas JC, Harting MT. Prevalence and impact of
admission hyper ﬁbrinolysis in severely injured pediatric trauma patients.
Surgery 2015;158:812–8.
[119] Haas T, Goobie S, Spielmann N, Weiss M, Schmugge M. Improvements in
patient blood management for pediatric craniosynostosis surgery using a
ROTEM1 — assisted strategy — feasibility and costs. Paediatr Anaesth
2014;24:774–80.
[120] Haas T, Fries D, Velik-Salchner C, Oswald E, Innerhofer P. Fibrinogen in
craniosynostosis surgery. Anesth Analg 2008;106:725–31.
[121] Meier PM, Zurakowski D, Goobie SM, Proctor MR, Meara JG, Young VJ, et al.
Multivariable predictors of substantial blood loss in children undergoing
craniosynostosis repair: implications for risk stratiﬁcation. Paediatr Anaesth
2016;26:960–9.
[122] Kozek-Langenecker SA, Afshari A, Albaladejo P, Santullano CA, De Robertis E,
Filipescu DC, et al. Management of severe perioperative bleeding: Guidelines
from 
the 
European 
Society 
of 
Anaesthesiology. 
Eur 
J 
Anaesthesiol
2013;30:270–382.
[123] Segal JB, Dzik WH, Transfusion Medicine/Haemostasis Clinical Trials Net-
work. Paucity of studies to support that abnormal coagulation test results
predict bleeding in the setting of invasive procedures: an evidence-based
review. Transfusion (Paris) 2005;45:1413–25.
[124] Boissier E, Se´vin-Allouet M, Le Thuaut A, De Gaalon S, Trossae¨rt M, Rozec B,
et al. A 2-min at 4500 g rather than a 15-min at 2200 g centrifugation does
not impact the reliability of 10 critical coagulation assays. Clin Chem Lab Med
2017;55:e118–21.
[125] Laursen TH, Meyer MAS, Meyer ASP, Gaarder T, Naess PA, Stensballe J, et al.
Thrombelastography Early Amplitudes in bleeding and coagulopathic trau-
ma patients: results from a multicenter study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg
2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/TA.0000000000001735.
[126] Vassault A, Annaix V, Houlbert C, Berkane Z, Vaubourdolle M, Goudable J,
et al. Recommandations pour la maıˆtrise des phases pre´-analytique et
analytique des examens de biologie me´dicale de´localise´s. Ann Biol Clin
(Paris) 2012;70:233–48.
[127] Le Quellec S, Paris M, Nougier C, Sobas F, Rugeri L, Girard S, et al. Pre-
analytical effects of pneumatic tube system transport on routine haemato-
logy and coagulation tests, global coagulation assays and platelet function
assays. Thromb Res 2016;153:7–13.
[128] GFHT. Recommandations pre´-analytiques en he´mostase. In: La qualiﬁcation
d’un pneumatique pour le transport des tubes en he´mostase; 2015
[Available at: http://site.geht.org/docutheque/?ss=pneumatique&theme=
documents-gfht&subtheme=All; accessed 18 December 2017].
S. Roullet et al. / Anaesth Crit Care Pain Med 38 (2019) 539–548
548
